# Prediction of Forest Fires: A Combined Machine Learning and IoT based Approach

Forest fire, a sweeping and destructive conflagrationin the wilderness is one of the major causes of drastic environmental and biological undesirable changes. Loss of soil fertility, destruction of the organic life in the forest as well as the microbiological life in the soil are some immediate after effects of a forest fire. When human beings are exposed to gases and fine particulate matter resulting from forest fires in quantities above Permissible Exposure Limits (PEL), itresults in respiratory ailments such as upper respiratory tract infections, bronchial asthma and decreased in lung functioning.

A forest fire can last as long as four to five months consuming up to eight million acres of forest land. According to a report from NASA, the wildfires that occur today last for almost two months more than what they would if they had occurred long back in 1970’s. Therefore, forest fires have always been a source of constant fear as they were less predictable.
Forest fire prediction constitutes a significant component of forest fire management. Hence, this project aims at predicting a forest fire prone region and the occurrence of a forest fire. Preventive measures can hence be devisedto avert a major catastrophe.

Though, the immediate cause for a forest fire could be an unintentional or a careless human action, extremely arid weather conditions highly contribute to the occurrence of wildfires. In this project we try to explore these weather conditions. Information regarding the climatic condition of the forest fire prone regions, i.e. temperature, relative humidity, average precipitation, speed and direction of wind, etc. are obtained by data mining and analysed using Machine learning techniques. Data related to the flora found in the region, the density of trees, types of grasses present is also obtained.

We intend to draw a relation between these parameters and the probability of occurrence of a forest fire. Machine learning algorithms such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Support Vector Machines (SVM), Random Forests and Gradient Boosting will be implemented to train the model. The results of all these methods will be compared and the best suited one will be used for the test samples. Its parameters will be tweaked to have a minimum generalization error. So, given the climatic parameters and flora characters of a region the proposed model will be able to predict whether a forest fire can be expected in the region, if yes, when would it occur and the probabilistic rate at which it would spread. 

To achieve the above stated objectives, Microsoft Azure Machine Learning Studio will be employed. It provides a suitable platform to train models faster and fine tune the parameters appropriately. It also allows to run multiple ML models in parallel and select the one which provides the best results. These user friendly properties of Azure will facilitate us to achieve best results.

But, prediction alone will not suffice. Hence, we plan on deploying features to avert the disaster and minimize its impact on precious lives. The project will aim to employ thermal IR cameras at specific locations over regions where a forest fire is predicted. These sensors will be interfaced with a Raspberry Pi to communicate via a cloud service to alert (when it crosses the set threshold) the concerned fire management authorities of the region to deploy a dense network of firefighting mechanisms over the region. To implement this, the project will depend on the Microsoft Azure Cloud computing platform.

Thus, the proposed project will provide a complete and efficient way to predict and prepare for forest fires.
